# Caning Peg Lattices

Caning peg lattices are sturdy person-scale structures assembled from three parts: struts, nodes, and caning pegs. Assembly is carried out using a simple tool assembled from one of each of these parts. This tool is also used to quickly disassemble the lattice for transport, storage, or re-configuration. 

Caning peg lattices are great fun to build, particularly as a group. If you are reading this, consider finding your way to a CNC router (most models will suffice) and milling a set for yourself or your class. Don't forget to order caning pegs; as a rule of thumb, you'll want 350-400 pegs per full sheet of plywood you mill. At ~$0.40 each, caning peg costs easily justify sourcing nicer plywood than the leftover construction-grade stock I used for the first prototypes. 

Struts and nodes are milled from plywood, while caning pegs are commercially available tapered maple rods used in chair caning. Struts are long slender straight pieces and fit into round nodes at connection points. Sliding a tapered caning peg into the resulting circular gap between the struts and nodes pins them into place. The tool is used to tap the peg home, where it is held in place by friction. Generally speaking, the joints are quite forgiving, both to machining tolerances and to peg tapping enthusiasm; if you really hammer them in the nodes can break, but I've only seen this happen twice after a good bit of rough use. 

In the first iteration of caning peg lattices, nodes have three equiangular attachment points, so connecting them to neighboring nodes using struts results in a planar hexagonal lattice. Opposing pairs of nodes in the lattice measure roughly 16" (~400 mm) between centers, conveniently sized to hang on hooks installed in a US-spec stud wall. The amount of area which is covered by the parts milled from a standard 4x8 foot (~3 m^2) sheet of plywood depends on the configuration. If connected to form a larger hexagon, two such sheets of plywood should be just enough to build a 91-hexagon r=6 sheet (where e.g. Webb is r=3), resulting in a long diagonal length of 4.8 m (~16 ft), a total area of 12.6 m^2, and an expansion ratio (e.g. large hexagon area vs uncut plywood area) of ~2.6. Such a structure requires 612 caning pegs and a fairly large room to build it, roughly two parking spots side-by-side. 

Caning peg lattice joints incorporate a bit of intentional compliance, both in off-plane bending and in in-plane rotation. This allows a long string of hexagons to be connected to form a large circle, or a 7-hexagon cluster to be hollowed out and connected with five rather than six neighbors, forming a slight dome. Eventually, one (of many) directions I'd like to take this project is towards the scale of the built environment; imagine macro-scale nanotube-like structures with dome lids, interconnected to form useful gathering spaces which are optionally skinned with a weatherproof shell to form temporary shelters. 